University of South Carolina 
College of Engineering and Computing 
CSCE 590-01: From Data to Decisions with Open Data: A Practical Introduction to AI Spring 2021 
Section 001: Hybrid 
Synchronous (via Blackboard Ultra), In class – only when announced 
Asynchronous Online (via Blackboard Recording after scheduled class), 
Biplav Srivastava, Ph.D. 
Professor, AI Institute,  
Computer Science & Engg., 541 Main St, Horizon 1, 4th  Floor, Univ. South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208 
(518) 496-0128  
biplav.s@sc.edu
Course Website: https://blackboard.sc.edu 
Supplementary Website: 
https://sites.google.com/site/biplavsrivastava/teaching/csce 771-computer-processing-of-natural-language
Teaching Assistant: N/A
Office Hours: WF 11:30 am – 12:30 pm or by appointment 
Class Timings: TTh 1:15 pm – 2:30 pm



Course Syllabus 
Catalog Description 
This will be an introductory AI course focused on solving practical problems using open data available  freely for reuse. It will teach different methods for data processing, generating analysis and  communicating insights to users. Further, we will consider how an agent should take decisions in the  presence of uncertainty and incomplete information. The course will cover AI sub-fields of learning,  reasoning, representation, preferences and uncertainty. 
Course Outcomes 
As a result of successful participation in this course, undergraduate students will be able to: 1. L1: Identify patterns in problems around us that can be solved with better information / insights  derived from data. Example: gap in information about demand and supply. 
2. L2: Explain opportunities, issues related to data and tools: (a) data meant for reuse, i.e., open  data (b) data quality, (c) data integration, (d) privacy concerns and bias with data, (e) experiment  design,  
3. L3: Explain, execute and create analytical methods to process data: (a) unstructured data, (b)  semi-structured data, (c) structured data  
4. L4: Explain AI methods in data analysis: (a) Learning methods, (b) Reasoning, (c) Representation  and standardization – knowledge graphs/ ontology, (d) Preferences, (e) Handling Uncertainty 
As a result of successful participation in this course, graduate students will be able to do all of the above,  and: 
1. L5: Evaluate gaps in analytical methods and create new ones to process data  2. L6: Explain data-driven insights to end-users with user-oriented interfaces, provide explanations  for produced output to build trust. Using interactive interfaces, like visualizations and chatbots,  explain how users will be able to interact with insights and build trust in AI. 
3. L7: Explain research findings in open areas and critique their contributions  
All learning outcomes in this primarily Distributed Learning course, with possibility for in-class experience  attendance when safely possible, are equivalent to face-to-face (F2F) version of this course. 
Graduate students will be assigned additional responsibilities and evaluated correspondingly.
CSCE 771 (Srivastava) Syllabus Page 2 
Prerequisites 
Experience with a first course in data structures (CSCE 350), programming (CSCE 330) and mathematics  is needed. 
Textbooks and Reading Materials 
1. Python for Data Analysis 
a. Latest: Python for Data Analysis Book, by Wes McKinney, 2nd Edition. On Amazon at:  https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1491957662/, ISBN-13: 978-1491957660, ISBN-10:  1491957662  
b. Book Data and Code Notebooks: https://github.com/wesm/pydata-book 
c. 1st edition (free download): https://bedford-computing.co.uk/learning/wp 
content/uploads/2015/10/Python-for-Data-Analysis.pdf 
2. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (Fourth edition, 2020) 
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
ISBN-13: 978-0134610993 
3. Open Datasets 
a. US: https://www.data.gov/ or any US state 
b. Text of legislations - LegiScan, https://legiscan.com/ 
c. Kaggle datasets: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets 
d. Google datasets search: https://datasetsearch.research.google.com/ 
All readings/materials comply with copyright and fair use policies. 
Required Software 
In order to access course materials and complete the course assignments you must have access to: • A personal computer (PC) or laptop with the Microsoft Office Suite (Word, Excel, PowerPoint). 
• The Internet (for using email, browsing the web, accessing the course website, and submitting  assignments) 
• Programming environment setup using open source. Python using Jupyter Notebook or Java  using Eclipse will be the supported languages. 
• For any proprietary tool, please consult the instructor. As a general rule, the instructor will ensure  that no student may get an undue advantage due to usage of a particular technology that is  unavailable to others.  
Course Format 
This course will be delivered synchronously via Blackboard. The primary medium of course delivery  will be online with live online lecture and their recordings available afterwards for asynchronous  viewing. No student needs to come to physical class if they do not want to. 
The instructor will attempt to familiarize with students and be on campus as much is safely possible. If  conditions improve and students favor, we will allow a small fraction of students to come to class (like 5- 10%) on a rotating basis. Hence, in class will be only when announced and only for interested students.  In class attendance will have no impact on course outcome. 
• Student-to-Instructor (S2I) Interaction: Students will listen/view lectures online via videos and  interact with the professor through email or Blackboard Collaborate Ultra, and (possibly)  discussion boards. The professor will post regular announcements, provide individual feedback to  students, and hold online office hours via Blackboard Collaborate Ultra. 
• Students-to-Student (S2S) Interaction: Students will engage in discussions through email, the  discussion board, and Blackboard Collaborate Ultra. 
CSCE 771 (Srivastava) Syllabus Page 3 
• Student-to-Content (S2C) Interaction: Students will engage with course content by completing  assignments and participating in discussion boards and video conference meetings.  
The instructor will reply to all feedback in a reasonable amount of time; the same is expected of the  students. Specifically, 
• Communication: Responses to email communication and questions will be provided within 48 hours. In subject, please prefix with “CSEC590: ”If you have a question about any deliverable  (e.g., project, assignment, presentation) with a deadline, you are advised to email me at least 5  days before it is due so that there is sufficient time between response and deadline. 
• Test Grading: Grades for assignments will be returned within 1 week of due date. 
Attendance Policy 
You are expected to attend class lectures and participate in class discussions. If you expect to miss class  for any reason you should contact the instructor by email as soon as possible. You are responsible for all  material covered in lectures whether you are present or not. Lectures will not only be used to illustrate  and expand on the material in the textbook, but will also include material available only during lecture that  will appear on the assignments, quizzes, and exams.  
Lecture presentations assume that you have read the assigned material before coming to class and are  prepared to ask questions during class. If you don't ask questions, then I will assume that you understand  the material. If there is a topic you do not understand, it is your responsibility to seek clarification from  me during lectures or during office hours, or from other students. If you miss a lecture, it is your  responsibility to view recorded class notes from Blackboard, get the notes and announcements from a  classmate. 
Time Commitment and Planning 
Any university senior undergraduate or graduate course requires a large amount of work outside of  lecture. I assume that when you register for this course you will allocate an average of at least 8-10 hours  per week, in addition to lectures, to study the textbook material, complete the homework assignments,  and prepare for course project. It is your responsibility to manage your workload. If you procrastinate  starting your assignments, you may find that you do not have enough time to complete the project or  assignments, or that a technology problem may prevent you from completing your assignment. Note that  not being able to access a computer or network will not be considered an acceptable excuse for  submitting your assignment late. 
Time Allocation Plan 
• Week 1: Introduction 
• Week 2: Motivation: Problem around us and the potential of data science 
• Week 3: Platform: Data science/ AI tools 
• Week 4: Open data and quality issues 
• Week 5: Analysis - Data preparation, annotations  
• Week 6: Analysis – Supervised learning I 
• Week 7: Interaction – Visualization I  
• Week 8: Analysis – Supervised learning II – Advanced 
• Week 9: Analysis – Unsupervised learning I 
• Week 10: Analysis – Unsupervised learning II – Advanced  
• Week 11: Interaction - Visualization II - Advanced 
• Week 12: Bias and Trust issues with Data Analysis 
• Week 13: Project presentations 
• Week 14: Project presentations, Conclusion
CSCE 771 (Srivastava) Syllabus Page 4 
Assessments 
For undergraduate students  
• Project: 50% + 10%: project report (50%) and code, for elevator presentation to class (10%) o Data analysis project 
▪ Dataset must be from given catalog 
▪ Use analytical methods to present new insights 
• Quiz: 20% 
o 4 based on preceding lectures 
• Exam: 20% 
o For undergraduate, final examination. Total 20% 
Tests 1000  
points 
• Course Project – report, in-class presentation 600 points 
• Quiz – best of 3 from 4 200 points 
• Final Exam 200 points 
Total 1000  
points 
Your overall final course letter grade will be determined by your points on the above assessments.  For graduate students  
• Project: 50% + 10%: project report (50%) and code, for elevator presentation to class (10%) o Data analysis project OR 
▪ Dataset must be from given catalog 
▪ Use analytical methods to present new insights 
o Create or explore new methods (preferred for graduate students) project  
▪ Problem to be discussed with instructor 
▪ Example: Analyze sound signals to estimate crowd 
• Quiz: 20% 
o 4 based on preceding lectures 
• Exam:  
o Research paper reading (10%) and presentation to class (10)% - Total 20% 
▪ Read a paper accepted at a top Data / AI conference: AAAI 2019-2021, IJCAI  2019-2021, NeurIPS 2019-2021, KDD 2019-2021, SIGMOD 2019-2021. Make a  
1-slide summary based on given presentation template. 
▪ Present a 1-slide summary to class (10%) 
Tests 1000 
points 
• Course Project – report, in-class presentation 600 points 
• Quiz – best of 3 from 4 200 points 
• Final Exam – Paper summary, in-class presentation 200 points 
Total 1000  
points
CSCE 771 (Srivastava) Syllabus Page 5 
Your final grade is based on the total points you have earned over the semester. Letter grades will be  assigned as follows:  
A = [900-1000] 
B+ = [870-899] 
B = [800-869] 
C+ = [770-799] 
C = [700-769] 
D+ = [670-699] 
D = [600-669] 
F = [0-599] 
If everyone performs very well, I do not have a problem with assigning everyone A's. However, poor  performance (particularly failure to do project on time) will result in a low grade. 
Important Note Regarding Grade Appeals 
My teaching assistant or I will grade all assignments. If you have a question about a grade you have  received, or you believe that you were graded incorrectly, please see me during office hours or set up an  online appointment. If you wish to appeal an assignment grade you must do so within one (1) week of my  posting the grade to Blackboard. If you want to make a case for re-grading your work based on another  student’s grade on the same task, I will review and then re-grade your work as well as the other student’s  work entirely from scratch. 
Missing a Quiz: There will be 5 quizzes on announced dates. A student’s lowest score from the 5 will be  removed and the rest will be considered for assessment. If a person misses 1 quiz, the score of that quiz  will be ignored. If a person misses more quizzes, this will impact their assessment. 
Missing slot on project or paper presentation: Unless the instructor is informed 1 week in advance,  missing the presentation slot will lead to a zero on presentation component. 
Missing the project report: A delay of 7 days will be allowed with a penalty of 20% (200 points). No  point will be awarded for any delay beyond a week for project report.  
Request for Accommodations 
The University of South Carolina is committed to providing access to programs and services for qualified  students with disabilities. If you are a student with a disability and require accommodation to participate  and complete requirements for this class, notify me immediately and contact the Student Disability  Resource Center (http://www.sa.sc.edu/sds, 1523 Greene Street, LeConte College Room 112A, 803-777- 6142, sasds@mailbox.sc.edu) for verification of eligibility and determination of specific accommodations.  In addition, please provide me the required accommodation letter from the Student Disability Resource  Center. All course materials are available in alternative format upon request. 
Academic Integrity 
University policies and procedures regarding academic integrity are defined in policy STAF 6.25,  Academic Responsibility - The Honor Code (see http://www.sc.edu/policies/ppm/staf625.pdf). Prohibited  behaviors include 
plagiarism, cheating, falsification, and complicity. All potential Honor Code violations will be reported to  the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity, which has the authority to implement non academic penalties as described in STAF 6.25. Academic penalties for Honor Code violations in this  course range from a zero on the assignment to failure of the course. 
In reference to this course, students are expected to do their own work when assignments require  individual work. For example, students may not copy the work of others, either manually or electronically,  under these conditions. Further, students who allow their work to be copied by others risk violation of the University Honor Code. If situations arise in which the application of the University Honor Code is  unclear, students should seek the interpretation of the instructor.
CSCE 771 (Srivastava) Syllabus Page 6 
The faculty takes violations of the University Honor Code (http://www.sc.edu/policies/ppm/staf625.pdf) seriously. Students are encouraged to review the Honor Code and to understand the consequences of  any action that is proven to be a violation of the code. 
Remember that the first tenet of the Carolinian Creed is, “I will practice personal and academic  integrity.”

